As we saw in the introduction,
the three in an optimization model
are the decision variables, the objective
function, and the constraints.
The key to the application of
optimization is to be able to formulate
the problem as a mathematical model,
this requires practice.
So in this video,
we will follow a systematic
process to translate a decision
problem in to a mathematical model.
We will focus on
the transportation problem
that we describe in
the introduction of this module.
In the transportation problem, we want
to find the best way of moving units of
product from one set of
suppliers to a set of customers.
The suppliers have limited capacity
to meet the customer's demands.
There is a cost associated with moving
one unit of product from a supplier
to a customer.
So, in terms of data there are three
sets of values, capacity, demand, and
transportation costs.
The first step is to identify
the decision variables.
In this problem there is only
one set of decision variables,
the quantity to be shipped from
each supplier to each customer.
Since there are five suppliers and
four customers,
there are four times five, or
20 decision variables in this problem.
We then need to give each
variable a unique name.
See the suppliers are labeled A to E and
the customers are labeled 1 to 4,
we can create a name this is
a combination of these two labels.
In this way, A1, A2, A3, and
A4 represent the quantities shipped from
supplier A to customers 1, 2, 3, and 4.
The same is done for
the other suppliers, resulting in 20
unique names shown in this table.
The second step is to
formulate the constraints,
this problem has two
main sets of constraints.
One set of constraints to limit the total
amount shipped from each supplier and
another set of constraints to make sure
that the solution satisfies the demand.
Constraints are formulated as
functions of the decision variables.
In this course we are going
to focus on linear functions.
This means that constraints will be the
sums of all differences of variables or
sums of differences of variables
multiplied by constants.
Let's formulate the capacity constraints.
Since we want to limit the amount of
units shipped from each supplier,
we calculate the total units
shipped from each supplier.
The total quantities sent by Supplier A is
the sum of all the quantities
sent from this location,
that is A1+A2+A3+A4.
Since this amount should not exceed
the capacity of the supplier,
then the constraint is that the sum of
the shipments from Supplier A should be
less than or equal to 60.
The capacity constraints for the other
suppliers are formulated in a similar way.
Now, let's formulate
the demand constraints.
The total quantity that each customers
receives is the sum of the units
shipped from a supplier.
For example, the total number of units
received by customer is the sum of A1 + B1
+ C1 + D1 + E1.
This is the sum of the shipments to
customer 1 from all suppliers.
In order to satisfy customer A demand this
sum should be greater than or equal to 75.
The same logic applies to
the other three customers
to formulate their demand constraints.
There is one more thing
that must be added that is
very common in these type
of mathematical models.
In most problems,
the only meaningful value for
the decision variables are positive.
In other words, negative values for the
decision variables often have no meaning.
If you think about it, in all formulation
of the transportation problem,
negative values for
the decision variables have no meaning.
The only possible interpretation
of a negative shipment would be
product that is returned to the supplier.
However, the model is not set
up to handle this situation.
This means that we need to add bounds for
the decision variables to
force it to be positive.
So we simply say that all the variables
in the model are non-negative.
In these bounds are known as
non-negativity constraints.
The third and final step consists of
formulating the objective function.
This is the mathematical expression that
evaluates the quality of the solution.
In optimization we want to find
the best solution to our problem.
Where best means that the solution
achieves the maximum or
the minimum value of
the objective function.
For the transportation problem,
best means a solution that minimizes
the total cost of supplying the product
needed to satisfy all the demand.
The objective,
like the constraints is formulated
as a mathematical function
of the decision variables.
We're going to focus on
linear objective functions.
We have a table of costs,
in which each entry
represents the cost of sending a unit of
product from a supplier to a customer.
We also have decision variables that
represent the number of units shipped from
each supplier to each customer.
Then, the objective function is the sum
of the product of each cost times
its corresponding decision variable.
For example, the cost of shipping a unit
of product from supplier A to customer 1,
is 3.
Since the decisions variable A1 represents
all the units that are going to be sent
from supplier A to customer 1,
then the cost of the quantity
sent from supplier A to
customer 1 is 3 times A1.
All the other costs are calculated
in that similar way.
The total cost is the sum
of all these products.
The total cost function is linear
because it is the sum of variables that
are multiplied by constant values.
We have seen how to formulate
an optimization problem
as a mathematical model
using linear functions.
This type of formulation is known
as a linear programming model.
Specialized algorithms have been
developed to solve this type of problems.
We're not going to discuss
these algorithms here,
we are just going to use them.
But what is important to
keep in mind is that these
algorithms are capable of solving
very large linear programming models.
By that I mean models with many decision
variables and many constraints.
This is why, whenever possible,
analysts use
only linear functions to formulate the
constraints and the objective function.
I just want to mention one
more thing before we go.
In our example we have bounds for
the decision variables and
two types of general constraints.
A set of less than or
equal constraints to model capacity and
a set of greater than or
equal constraints to model demand.
It is also possible to use equality
constraints in these models.
So remember, you can use linear
functions to formulate constraints and
the objective.
And if you can represent all restrictions
of the problem with equality or
inequality constraints, then you
have linear programming model, for
which they are very
efficient solution methods.